# Human-made Things in the Bible

## License Information

Human-made Things in the Bible © United Bible Societies, 2025. Adapted from: <cite>The Works of Their Hands: Man-made Things in the Bible</cite>, by Ray Pritz © 2009 United Bible Societies. This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/</a>).



--------------------------------


## 标题：重量、度量和货币参考书目 (id: REALIA:11.7)

11\.7 标题：重量、度量和货币参考书目
=====================

Alexander, David, and Pat Alexander, editors. 1973\. “Linear Measures.” In The Lion Handbook to the Bible, page 105\. Berkhamsted, England: Lion Publishing.

———. 1973\. “Measurements of Capacity.” In The Lion Handbook to the Bible, pages 106–107\. Berkhamsted, England: Lion Publishing.

———. 1973\. “Money.” In The Lion Handbook to the Bible, pages 108–109\. Berkhamsted, England: Lion Publishing.

———. 1973\. “Weights and Measures.” In The Lion Handbook to the Bible, page 104\. Berkhamsted, England: Lion Publishing.

Bratcher, Robert G. 1959\. “Weights, Money, Measures, and Time.” The Bible Translator 10:165–174\.

Fry, Euan. 1978\. “Translating Biblical Measurements.” The Bible Translator 29:237–243\.

Huey, F. B. 1975\. “Weights and Measures.” In Zondervan Pictorial Encyclopedia of the Bible (Volume 5, pages 913–923\). Edited by Merrill C. Tenney. Grand Rapids: Zondervan.

Louw, Johannes P., and Eugene A. Nida. 1988; 2nd edition, 1989\. “Money and Monetary Units.” In Greek\-English Lexicon of the New Testament based on Semantic Domains (Volume 1, pages 62–64\). New York: United Bible Societies.

———. 1988; 2nd edition, 1989\. “Specific Measures of Volume.” In Greek\-English Lexicon of the New Testament based on Semantic Domains (Volume 1, pages 709–710\). New York: United Bible Societies.

Margot, Jean\-Claude. 1989\. “Revision of the Français Courant Bible.” The Bible Translator 40:236–241\.

Mundhenk, Norm. 1986\. “Notes: The Translation of Shekel (šeqel).” The Bible Translator 37:237–238\.

Ortiz, Pedro. 1996\. “Translating Terms of Measurement.” The Bible Translator 47:413–419\.

Powell, Marvin. A. 1992\. “Weights and Measures.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, Volume 6, pages 897–908\. Edited by David Noel Freedman. New York: Doubleday.

Schneider, T. 1998\. “Containers and Contents: A case of functional equiva\-lence.” The Bible Translator 49:215–225\.

Strong, James. 1888\. “Metrology.” In Cyclopaedia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature, Volume 6, pages 192–199\. Edited by John M’Clintock and James Strong. New York: Harper.

de Vaux, Roland. 1961; 2nd edition, 1973\. Ancient Israel: Its Life and Institutions, pages 195–209\. Translated by John McHugh. London: Darton, Long\-man and Todd.


