# Human-made Things in the Bible

## License Information

Human-made Things in the Bible © United Bible Societies, 2025. Adapted from: <cite>The Works of Their Hands: Man-made Things in the Bible</cite>, by Ray Pritz © 2009 United Bible Societies. This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/</a>).



--------------------------------


## 標題：部分參考書目 (id: REALIA:12)

12 標題：部分參考書目
============

**文本**
------

*Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia* （希伯來文聖經）. 1967/77; 5th corrected printing, 1997\. Edited by K. Elliger and W. Rudolph. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft.

*Biblia Sacra: Iuxta Vulgatam Versionem* （拉丁文聖經譯本）. 1983\. Edited by Robert Weber. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft. (Cited as Vulgate.)

*The Greek New Testament* （希臘文新約聖經－GNT5）. 5th revised edition, 2014\. Edited by Barbara Aland, Kurt Aland, Johannes Karavidopoulos, Carlo M. Martini, and Bruce M. Metzger. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft.

*Novum Testamentum Graece* （希臘文新約聖經－NTG28）. 28th revised edition, 2012\. Edited by Barbara Aland, Kurt Aland, Johannes Karavidopoulos, Carlo M. Martini, and Bruce M. Metzger. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft.

*Septuaginta: Id est Vetus Testamentum graece iuxta LXX interpretes* （希臘文舊約聖經《七十士譯本》）. 1935; combined one\-volume edition, 1979\. Edited by Alfred Rahlfs. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft. (Cited as Septuagint.)

**中文譯本**
--------

*《聖經：新標點和合本》* 。聯合聖經公會，1988。（《和》）

*《聖經：呂振中譯本》* 。香港聖經公會，1992。（《呂》）

*《聖經：現代中文譯本修訂版》* 。聯合聖經公會，1994。（《現修》）

*《聖經：和合本2010》* （或稱《和合本修訂版》）。香港聖經公會，2010。（《和2010》）

*《聖經：思高聖經》* 。修訂版。思高聖經學會，2012。 （《思》）

**現代外文譯本**
----------

Die Bibel: Einheitsübersetzung. 1980\. Freiburg: Herder. (Cited as BE (Bible in Basic English).)

Die Bibel in heutigem Deutsch: Die Gute Nachricht des Alten und Neuen Testaments. 1982\. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft. (Cited as first edition of GECL (German Common Language Version (Gute Nachricht Bibel)).)

Die Bibel: Nach der Übersetzung Martin Luthers. Revised edition, 1985\. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft. (Cited as Luther.)

Bibelen: Det Gamle og Det Nye Testamente. 1978\. Oslo: Det Norske Bibelselskap. (Cited as NOB, Norwegian Bible.)

La Bible de Jérusalem. 1966, 1984\. Paris: Les Éditions du Cerf.

La Bible de Jérusalem: Nouvelle édition revue et corrigée. 1998\. Paris: Les Éditions du Cerf.

La Bible en français courant avec les Livres Deutérocanoniques. 1991\. Paris: Alliance biblique universelle. (Cited as FRCL (French Common Language Version (Bible en français courant)), French common language version.)

Bíblia Sagrada: Tradução em português corrente. 1993\. Lisboa: Sociedade Bíblica de Portugal. (Cited as Portuguese common language version.)

A Bíblia Sagrada: Tradução na Linguagem de Hoje. 1988\. São Paulo: So\-ciedade Bíblica do Brasil. (Cited as Brazilian common language version.)

The Book of Exodus (Translator’s Old Testament). No date. London: The British and Foreign Bible Society. (Cited as TOT.)

Buku Loyera. 1998\. Blantyre, Malawi: Bible Society of Malawi. (Cited as the Chewa common language translation.)

The Catholic Study Bible: New American Bible. 1990\. New York: Oxford University Press. (Cited as NAB (New American Bible (1970)).)

The Complete Bible: An American Translation. 1923, 1927, 1948\. The Old Testament translated by J. M. Powis Smith and others; the Apocrypha and the New Testament translated by Edgar J. Goodspeed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (Cited as AT (American Translation (Goodspeed, 1935)).)

Dios Habla Hoy: La Biblia con deuterocanónicos (Versión Popular). 1979\. New York: Sociedades Biblicas Unidas. (Cited as SPCL (Spanish Common Language Version (Dios Habla Hoy)), Spanish common language version.)

God’s Word. 1995\. Grand Rapids: World Publishing. (Cited as GW (God's Word Translation).)

Good News Bible: The Bible in Today’s English Version. 1976; 2nd edition, 1992\. New York: American Bible Society. (Cited as GNT (Good News Translation (1992)), Good News Translation.)

Groot Nieuws Bijbel. 1996\. Haarlem: Nederlands Bijbelgenootschap. (Cited as DUCL (Dutch Common Language Version), Dutch common language version.)

Gute Nachricht Bibel: Altes und Neues Testament. Revised edition, 1997\. Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft. (Cited as GECL (German Common Language Version (Gute Nachricht Bibel)), German common language version.)

Hebrew New Testament. 1976\. Jerusalem: Bible Society in Israel.

The Holy Bible (Authorized or King James Version). 1611\. (Cited as KJV (King James Version (1611)).)

The Holy Bible: Contemporary English Version. 1995\. New York: American Bible Society. (Cited as CEV (Contemporary English Version).)

The Holy Bible: New Century Version. 1991\. Dallas: Word Publishing. (Cited as NCV (New Century Version).)

The Holy Bible: New King James Version. 1982\. Nashville, Camden, and New York: Thomas Nelson Publishers. (Cited as NKJV (New King James Version (1982)).)

The Holy Bible: New Living Translation. 1996\. Wheaton, Illinois: Tyndale House Publishers. (Cited as NLT (New Living Translation).)

The Holy Bible: New Revised Standard Version. 1989\. New York: Division of Christian Education of the National Council of Churches of Christ in the United States of America. (Cited as NRSV (New Revised Standard Version (1989)).)

The Holy Bible: Revised Standard Version. 1952, 1971, 1973\. New York: Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the Churches of Christ in the United States of America. (Cited as RSV (Revised Standard Version (1952)).)

The Holy Scriptures according to the Masoretic Text: A New Translation. 1917\. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society.

International Children’s Bible: New Century Version. 1986\. Fort Worth, Texas: Sweet Publishing.

The Jerusalem Bible. 1966\. Garden City, New York: Doubleday. (Cited as JB (Jerusalem Bible (1966)).)

The Living Bible. 1971\. Wheaton, Illinois: Tyndale House Publishers. (Cited as LB (Living Bible (1971)).)

The Moffatt Translation of the Bible. Revised edition, 1935\. London: Hodder \& Stoughton. (Cited as Mft (Moffatt Translation (1926)).)

The New American Standard Bible. 1976, 1978\. Chicago: Moody Press. (Cited as NASB (New American Standard Bible).)

The New English Bible. 1961, 1970\. Oxford: Oxford University Press; and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Cited as NEB (New English Bible (1970)).)

The New Jerusalem Bible. 1985\. London: Darton, Longman and Todd; and New York: Doubleday. (Cited as NJB (New Jerusalem Bible (1985)).)

The New Testament: A New Translation. 1968–1969\. 2 volumes. Translated by William Barclay. London and New York: Collins. (Cited as Brc.)

The New Testament in Modern English. 1972\. Translated by J. B. Phillips. New York: Macmillan. (Cited as Phps (J.B. Phillips: The New Testament in Modern English (1958)).)

The NIV (New International Version (1984)) Study Bible: New International Version. 1985\. Grand Rapids: Zondervan. (Cited as NIV (New International Version (1984)).)

Parola del Signore: La Bibbia (Traduzione Interconfessionale In Lingua Corrente). 1985\. Torino: Editrice Elle Di Ci; and Roma: Alleanza Biblica Universale. (Cited as ITCL (Italian Common Language Version), Italian common language version.)

La Bible: Parole de Vie. 2000\. Paris: Alliance biblique universelle. (Cited as PV.)

The Revised English Bible. 1989\. Oxford: Oxford University Press; and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Cited as REB (Revised English Bible (1989)).)

TANAKH: A New Translation of the Holy Scriptures According to the Traditional Hebrew Text. 1985\. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society. (Cited as NJPSV (New Jewish Publication Society Version), New Jewish Publication Society Version.)

Traduction œcuménique de la Bible. 1975\. Paris: Société biblique française et Éditions du Cerf. (Cited as TOB (Traduction Oecuménique de la Bible (French, 1975)).)

The Translator’s New Testament. 1973\. Produced under the direction of W. D. McHardy. London: The British and Foreign Bible Society. (Cited as TNT.)

The Translator’s Old Testament: The Book of Amos. 1975\. London: The British and Foreign Bible Society. (Cited as TOT.)

學術著作
----

Aberbach, Moshe. 1994\. Labor, Crafts and Commerce in Ancient Israel. Jerusalem: Magnes Press.

Avitsur, Shmuel. 1976\. Man and His Work: Historical Atlas of Tools and Workshops in the Holy Land. Written in Hebrew. Jerusalem: Carta and Israel Exploration Society.

Braun, Joachim. 2002\. Music in Ancient Israel/Palestine: Archaeological, Written, and Comparative Sources. Translated by Douglas W. Stott Grand Rapids: Eerdmans.

Connolly, Peter. 1983\. Living in the Time of Jesus of Nazareth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Galling, Kurt. 1937; 2nd edition, 1977\. Biblisches Reallexikon. Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr.

Gower, Ralph. 1987\. The New Manners and Customs of Bible Times. Chicago: Moody Press.

Gringoire, Pedro. 1984\. Archaeological Commentary on the Bible. Translated by Gonzalo Báez\-Camargo. Garden City, New York: Doubleday.

Matthews, Victor H. 1988; revised edition,1991\. Manners and Customs in the Bible. Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson.

Moorey, P. R. S. 1985\. Materials and Manufacture in Ancient Mesopotamia:

The Evidence of Archaeology and Art: Metals and Metalwork, Glazed Materials and Glass (BAR International Series, 237\). Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Negev, Avrahim, editor. 1972\. Archaeological Encyclopedia of the Holy Land. New York: Putnam.

Petrie, W. M. Flinders. 1927\. Objects of Daily Use. London: British School of Archaeology in Egypt.

Rousseau, John J., and Rami Arav. 1995\. Jesus and His World: An Archaeological and Cultural Dictionary. Minneapolis: Fortress Press.

Sperber, Daniel. 1993\. Material Culture in the Land of Israel in Talmudic Times. 2 volumes. Written in Hebrew. Jerusalem: Yad Yitzhak Ben\-Zvi.

Steinberg, Shalom Dov. 1992\. The Mishkan and the Holy Garments. Translated by Yisrael Ohad Ezrachi. Jerusalem: Toras Chaim Institute.

Thompson, J. A. 1986\. Handbook of Life in Bible Times. Downers Grove, Illinois: Inter\-Varsity Press.

Tubb, Jonathan N. 1991\. Bible Lands. New York: A. A. Knopf.

de Vaux, Roland. 1961; 2nd edition, 1973\. Ancient Israel: Its Life and Institutions. Translated by John McHugh. New York: Darton, Longman and Todd.

Yadin, Yigael. 1963\. The Art of Warfare in Biblical Lands in the Light of Archaeological Study. Translated by M. Pearlman. New York: McGraw\-Hill.

Ziffer, Irit. 1990\. At that time the Canaanites were in the land. Tel Aviv: Eretz Israel Museum.

詞典、文本研究和其他參考文獻
--------------

Albright, W. F., and C. S. Mann. 1971\. Matthew (Anchor Bible, 26\). Garden City, New York: Doubleday.

Andersen, A. A. 1989\. 2 Samuel (Word Biblical Commentary, 11\). Dallas: Word Books.

Barkay, Gabriel. 1997\. “The Megerah and the Tephachot.” Shnaton 11:32–45\.

Barthélemy, Dominique, A. R. Hulst, Norbert Lohfink, W. D. McHardy, H. P. Rüger, and James A. Sanders. 1973–1980\. Preliminary and Interim Report on the Hebrew Old Testament Text Project（*《希伯來文舊約文本項目初步和中期報告》* ）. 5 volumes. New York: United Bible Societies. (Cited as HOTTP (Hebrew Old Testament Text Project (UBS)).)

Bratcher, Robert G., and Howard A. Hatton. 1993\. A Handbook on The Revelation to John. New York: United Bible Societies.

Bratcher, Robert G., and Eugene A. Nida. 1961\. A Handbook on The Gospel of Mark. New York: United Bible Societies.

Bratcher, Robert G., and William D. Reyburn. 1991\. A Handbook on Psalms. New York: United Bible Societies.

Brown, Francis, S. R. Driver, and Charles A. Briggs, editors. 1907; revised edition, 1968\. A Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament. London: Oxford University Press.

Clark, David J., and Howard A. Hatton. 1989\. A Handbook on The Books of Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah. New York: United Bible Societies.

Clark, David, J. Norm Mundhenk, Eugene A. Nida, and Brynmor F. Price. 1993\. A Handbook on The Books of Obadiah, Jonah, and Micah. New York: United Bible Societies.

Durham, John I. 1987\. Exodus (Word Biblical Commentary, 3\). Waco, Texas: Word Books.

Ellington, John. 1990\. “Up on the Housetop.” The Bible Translator 41:238–243\.

Ellingworth, Paul, and Eugene A. Nida. 1983\. A Handbook on The Letter to the Hebrews. New York: United Bible Societies.

Fauna and Flora of the Bible. 1972; 2nd edition, 1980\. New York: United Bible Societies. (Cited as FFB.)

Ginsberg, H. L. 1933\. “Lexicographical Notes.” Zeitschrift für die alttesta\-mentliche Wissenschaft 51:308–309\.

Glück, J. J. 1966\. “The Conquest of Jerusalem in the Account of 2 Sam 5:6–8a, with Special Reference to ‘the Blind and the Lame’ and the Phrase ‘weyigga‘ bassinnôr.’ ” In Biblical Essays, pages 98–105\. Proceedings of the Ninth Meeting of the Old Testament Society of South Africa. Potchefstroom: University of Stellenbosch.

Goldstein, Jonathan A. 1976\. I Maccabees (Anchor Bible, 41\). New York: Doubleday.

Hatton, Howard. 1991\. “The Projections on the Frames of the Tabernacle.” The Bible Translator 42:205–209\.

Herodotus. 1981\. Histories. Books I\-II (Loeb Classical Library, 117\). Translated by A. D. Godley. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Hope, Edward R. 2005\. All Creatures Great and Small: Living Things in the Bible. New York: United Bible Societies.

Jones, Ivor, H. 1992\. “Musical Instruments.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, Volume 4, pages 934–939\. Edited by David Noel Freedman. New York: Doubleday.

———. 1986\. “Musical Instruments in the Bible, Part I.” The Bible Translator 37:101–116\.

———. 1987\. “Musical Instruments in the Bible, Part II. The Bible Translator 38:129–143\.

Josephus. 1930\. Jewish Antiquities. Books I\-III (Loeb Classical Library, 242\). Translated by H. St. J. Thackeray. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Keil, C. F., and F. Delitzsch. 1872; reprinted 1975\. Commentary on the Old Testament. Volume 3: I \& II Kings, I \& II Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans.

Lawergren. Bo. 1998\. “Distinctions among Canaanite, Philistine, and Israelite Lyres, and Their Global Lyrical Contexts.” Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research 309:41–68\.

Liddell, Henry George., and Robert Scott. 9th edition, 1940\. A Greek\-English Lexicon. Revised and augmented by Henry Stuart Jones and others. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Loh, I\-Jin, and Howard A. Hatton. 1997\. A Handbook on The Letter from James. New York: United Bible Societies.

Louw, Johannes P., and Eugene A. Nida. 2nd edition, 1989\. Greek\-English Lexicon of the New Testament based on Semantic Domains. 2 volumes. New York: United Bible Societies.

Mounce, Robert H. 1977\. The Book of Revelation (New International Com\-mentary on the New Testament). Grand Rapids: Eerdmans.

Newman, Barclay M., and Eugene A. Nida. 1980\. A Handbook on The Gospel of John. New York: United Bible Societies.

Newman, Barclay M., and Philip C. Stine. 1988\. A Handbook on The Gospel of Matthew. New York: United Bible Societies.

Noordtzij, A. 1983\. Numbers. Translated by Ed van der Maas. Grand Rapids: Zondervan.

O’Connell. Robert H. 1997\. “Kinnôr.” In New International Dictionary of Old Testament Theology and Exegesis, Volume 2, pages 666–667\. Edited by Willem A. VanGemeren. Grand Rapids: Zondervan.

———. 1997\. “Nēbel II.” In New International Dictionary of Old Testament Theology and Exegesis, Volume 3, pages 13–14\. Edited by Willem A. VanGemeren. Grand Rapids: Zondervan.

Oesterley, W. O. E. 1913\. “The First Book of Maccabees.” In The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament in English, Volume 1, pages 59–124\. Edited by R. H. Charles. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Ogden, Graham S., and Lynell Zogbo. 1998\. A Handbook on Song of Songs. New York: United Bible Societies.

Omanson, Roger L., and John E. Ellington. 2001\. A Handbook on The First and Second Books of Samuel. 2 volumes. New York: United Bible Societies.

Osborn, Noel D. 1990\. “Tent or Tabernacle? Translating Two Traditions.” The Bible Translator 41:214–221\.

Osborn, Noel D., and Howard A. Hatton. 1999\. A Handbook on Exodus. New York: United Bible Societies.

Péter\-Contesse, René, and John Ellington. 1990\. A Handbook on Leviticus. New York: United Bible Societies.

Reiling, J., and J. L. Swellengrebel. 1971\. A Handbook on The Gospel of Luke. New York: United Bible Societies.

Reyburn, William D. 1992\. A Handbook on The Book of Job. New York: United Bible Societies.

———. 1992\. A Handbook on Lamentations. New York: United Bible Societies.

Reyburn, William D., and Euan McG. Fry. 1998\. A Handbook on Genesis. New York: United Bible Societies.

Sheffer, Avigail. 1995\. “Needlework and Sewing in Israel from Prehistoric Times to the Roman Period.” In Fortunate the Eyes That See: Essays in Honor of David Noel Freedman in Celebration of His Seventieth Birthday, pages 527–559\. Edited by Astrid B. Beck, Andrew H. Bartelt, Paul R. Raabe, and Chris A. Franke. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans.

Scott, R. B. Y. 1965\. Proverbs, Ecclesiastes (Anchor Bible, 18\). New York: Doubleday.

Simpson, D. C. 1913\. “Tobit.” In The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament in English, Volume 1, pages 174–241\. Edited by R. H. Charles. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Sukenik, E. L. 1928\. “The Account of David’s Capture of Jerusalem.” Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society 8:12–16\.

de Waard, Jan. 1997\. A Handbook on Isaiah. Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns.

de Waard, Jan, and William A. Smalley. 1979\. A Handbook on The Book of Amos. New York: United Bible Societies.

Watts, John D. W. 1985\. Isaiah 1–33 (Word Biblical Commentary, 24\). Waco, Texas: Word Books.


