# Human-made Things in the Bible

## License Information

Human-made Things in the Bible © United Bible Societies, 2025. Adapted from: <cite>The Works of Their Hands: Man-made Things in the Bible</cite>, by Ray Pritz © 2009 United Bible Societies. This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/</a>).



--------------------------------


## Wooden clappers (id: REALIA:7.4.5)

7\.4\.5 Wooden clappers
=======================

Reference:
----------

Hebrew עֵץ, בְּרוֹשׁ (‘atsey broshim)

[2SA 6:5](https://ref.ly/2Sam6:5)

Description and usage:
----------------------

Clappers were flat, oblong, rectangular, or curved. They could be made of wood, ivory, or bone. They were tied together at one end, enabling them to be struck together. This produced a kind of slapping sound.

---

Translation:
------------

For “wooden clappers,” many cultures will know comparable percussion instruments, similar in use and appearance to castanets.

The Hebrew phrase *‘atsey broshim* in [2SA 6:5](https://ref.ly/2Sam6:5) has been given several interpretations. The phrase means literally “cypress trees” or “pieces of cypress wood.” This has led some scholars to suggest that this is not a reference to musical instruments, but that the people were waving cypress branches as a sign of joy. Others interpret this to mean “instruments made of cypress wood” (ITCL (Italian Common Language Version)), indicating a separate entry in the series of instruments named. It is also possible to understand the phrase to indicate the material from which the instruments that follow in the list were made; compare, for example, NCV (New Century Version) ’s rendering of the last half of this verse: “They were playing wooden instruments: lyres, harps, tambourines, rattles, and cymbals.”

* **Associated Passages:** 2 Samuel 6:5

