# Human-made Things in the Bible

## License Information

Human-made Things in the Bible © United Bible Societies, 2025. Adapted from: <cite>The Works of Their Hands: Man-made Things in the Bible</cite>, by Ray Pritz © 2009 United Bible Societies. This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/</a>).



--------------------------------


## Hair decoration, tiara, ribbon (id: REALIA:10.5.3)

10\.5\.3 Hair decoration, tiara, ribbon
=======================================

References:
-----------

Greek μίτρα (mitra)

[JDT 10:3](https://ref.ly/Jdt10:3), [JDT 16:8](https://ref.ly/Jdt16:8)

Description:
------------

The tiara was a decorative band, probably made of cloth, wrapped around the head or tied in the hair.

---

Translation:
------------

Almost all cultures know some kind of hair decoration worn by women. Normally it will be possible to use such a word. Translations vary for the Greek word *mitra*. GNT (Good News Translation (1992)) and ITCL (Italian Common Language Version) have “ribbon,” which is good. The word “turban” in NJB (New Jerusalem Bible (1985)) may be accurate, but it may sound strange if a turban is normally considered a headdress for men. NAB (New American Bible (1970)) “fillet” is similar to “ribbon,” but this word is obscure in contemporary English. The word “tiara” in RSV (Revised Standard Version (1952)) and NRSV (New Revised Standard Version (1989)) presents a nice picture of a woman beautifying her hair, which is the goal of the translator here.

* **Associated Passages:** Judith 10:3; Judith 16:8

