# Human-made Things in the Bible

## License Information

Human-made Things in the Bible © United Bible Societies, 2025. Adapted from: <cite>The Works of Their Hands: Man-made Things in the Bible</cite>, by Ray Pritz © 2009 United Bible Societies. This work is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (<a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/">https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/</a>).



--------------------------------


## Pound (id: REALIA:11.1.5)

11\.1\.5 Pound
==============

References:
-----------

Greek λίτρα (litra)

[JHN 12:3](https://ref.ly/John12:3), [JHN 19:39](https://ref.ly/John19:39)

[JHN 12:3](https://ref.ly/John12:3): In this verse the “pound” (RSV (Revised Standard Version (1952)); *litra* in Greek) of costly ointment would have been kept in a relatively small container, something that would hold about a third of a kilogram. This corresponds to the volume of a small jar or tin can today. PV says “half a liter.”
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In focus here is not so much the amount of perfume but rather its high value. Translators should ensure that the amount of the ointment chosen to translate this verse would indeed be expensive (about a year’s wages; see the discussion under *dēnarion* below, [11\.6\.2\.6 Drachma\<REALIA:11\.6\.2\.6\>](#)).

It may be most effective to substitute a container for the volume and begin this verse with “Mary took a bottle of very expensive perfume” (GW (God's Word Translation)).

[JHN 19:39](https://ref.ly/John19:39): RSV (Revised Standard Version (1952)) understands a *litra* to be equal to a pound, so at the end of this verse it has “about a hundred pounds’ weight.” This is misleading since the Roman *litra* contained only about three quarters of a modern pound. For this reason many English translations say “about 75 pounds” (so NIV (New International Version (1984))NCV (New Century Version)). In the metric system this will be “about 30 kilos” (FRCL (French Common Language Version (Bible en français courant))).

* **Associated Passages:** John 12:3; John 19:39

